[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Recent research in Brazil
has revealed the discovery
of an ancient megalithic
observatory built at least five
centuries before the European
conquest of the Americas began.
This finding, along with
other archeological,
fascinating discoveries
in Brazil in recent years,
which include giant
land carvings, remains
of fortified settlements,
and complex road networks,
are challenging
the earlier views
that the Amazon
had been untouched
by humans, except for
small nomadic tribes.
Nearly all the discoveries
were made after a period
of widespread deforestation
in the Amazon in the early
'90s through to the mid-2000s.
The archeology of the Amazon.
For decades, the Amazon was
thought by archeologists to have
been almost uninhabited
rainforest but recently were
made after a period of
widespread deforestation
in the Amazon in the early
'90s through to the mid-2000s.
The archeology of the Amazon.
For decades, the Amazon was
thought by archeologists
to have been almost
uninhabited rainforest.
But recently, researchers
have been finding new evidence
that the area was, in fact, a
hive of human activity and home
to millions of people.
In March 2018, a study
funded by National Geographic
and the European Research
Council Project Past
revealed details of 81 sites
in the previously unexplored
territory of the Amazon's
upper Tapajós Basin.
Settlements
discovered in the area
ranged from small villages
of around 100 feet
wide to a large site
covering 19 hectares
The sites were first discovered
by satellite imagery of the area
revealed by deforestation.
The remains of the
settlements are represented
by ditches enclosing the
sites for fortification,
sunken roads, and earth
platforms on which houses
would once have stood.
Dr. Jonas Gregoria de Souza
from the University of Exeter
was the first
author of the study.
He said regarding the
findings and the distribution
of the sites, "The idea
that the Amazon was
a pristine forest,
untouched by humans,
home to scattered
nomadic populations,
we already know
that was not true.
The big debate is how
populations were distributed
in pre-Columbian
times in the Amazon."
The idea was that
in the areas that
are located further away
from the main rivers,
populations maybe
were actually smaller.
And they had a negligible
impact on the environment.
We demonstrated
that these regions
may have had pretty
large populations as well
as in the past.
Wood charcoal associated with
pottery fragments from one site
was carbon dated to
between 1410 and 1460
AD, which fits in well
with the dating of many
of the sites
previously discovered
in the southern
rim of the Amazon,
which showed a peak of
activity between 1250 and 1500.
Models based on the team's
research indicate that
at the time, the southern rim of
the Amazon alone could have had
a population of between
500,000 and 1 million people.
However, this
population was soon
to be decimated by the
arrival of Europeans.
According to de Souza,
diseases traveled much faster
than people.
And probably this
population was already
weakened by diseases
brought by Europeans
even before the Europeans
set foot in the area.
The Brazilian Stonehenge.
The Solstice
Archeological Park is
located near the
city of Calçoene
in Amapá State, northern Brazil.
The site contains a
megalithic stone circle
and is often referred to
as the Amazon Stonehenge,
or the Brazilian Stonehenge.
The megalithic site,
which is located
on a hilltop on the bank
of the Rio Grande River,
consists of 127 upright
blocks of granite,
each of up to 13
feet in diameter
and weighing several
tons, standing
evenly paced in a circle,
measuring over 98 feet
in diameter.
After conducting radiocarbon
testing and carrying out
measurements during the
winter solstice at the site,
some scholars in the field of
archaeoastronomy determined that
an indigenous culture
arranged the megaliths
into an astronomical observatory
about 1,000 years ago or five
centuries before the European
conquest of the Americas began.
And three and a
half thousand years
after the building
of Stonehenge.
Archeologists theorize
that the site, referred
to in academic
sources as APCA18,
was constructed by a
sophisticated indigenous
people for astronomical,
ceremonial, or burial purposes,
or even a combination
of all three.
One of the stones at the
site has a circular hole
carved into it.
During the winter
solstice, the sun
shines directly
through this hole
onto another rock,
supporting the idea
that the Amazonian
Stonehenge was
used as an astronomical site.
According to The New
York Times, the site
was discovered by a cattle
rancher named Lailson Camilo da
Silva.
Apparently, da Silva was
removing trees in the late 1990s
to make land for his cattle
to graze on when he discovered
the stones.
In reality, da Silva already
knew they were there,
having initially found
them in the '60s.
But he said he had avoided
the site because he
felt that it was sacred.
Recently, hundreds of huge
earthworks known as geoglyphs
have been discovered
in Western Brazil,
revealing the last remnants of
land used by ancient societies
before the dense foliage of
the Amazon rainforest concealed
them centuries ago.
The peak period of forest
burning to clear land happened
between 2,300 and
1,400 years ago,
during which the first
earthworks are believed to have
been constructed.
While the form and
extent of these sites
can be determined using
aerial observations,
researchers are still not
sure what the original purpose
of the sites was.
Many of the structures are
unlikely to have been villages
as excavation at
the sites has not
revealed the substantial
amounts of cultural artifacts
which would be expected if
they had been habitation sites.
The layout of the
sites also suggests
that they weren't built
for defensive purposes.
One explanation which
has been put forward
is that the areas were used for
ritual gatherings of some kind
and so would have been visited
only intermittently by those
who once lived in the area.
Archeologist
Jennifer Watling has
compared the layout of the
sites with England's Stonehenge,
saying, "It's
interesting to note
that the format of the
geoglyphs with an outer ditch
and inner wall enclosure
are what are classically
described as henge sites.
The earliest phases at
Stonehenge consisted
of a similarly laid
out enclosure."
The latest discovery
in the Amazon.
In November 2020, it was
announced in the press
that one of the world's
largest collections
of prehistoric rock art had
been discovered in the Amazonian
rainforest.
The discovery, described as "The
Sistine Chapel of the Ancients,"
consisted of tens of thousands
of paintings of animals
and humans created up to 12 and
1/2 thousand years ago on cliff
faces stretching across
nearly 8 miles in Colombia.
The date of the artwork was
based partially on images of now
extinct ice age animals,
such as the mastodon,
a prehistoric relative of the
elephant that had been extinct
in South America for
at least 12,000 years.
There are also depictions of
Palaeolama, an extinct camelid,
as well as giant sloths
and iron age horses,
all seen at first
hand and painted
by some of the very first
humans ever to reach the Amazon.
Other images include fish,
turtles, lizards, and birds,
as well as people dancing and
holding hands with one figure
wearing a mask resembling
a bird with a beak.
The incredible discovery was
filmed for a major Channel 4
series called "Jungle Mystery--
Lost Kingdoms of the Amazon."
The documentary's presenter,
archeologist, and explorer,
Ella Al-Shamahi, said of
the extraordinary findings,
"This site is so new, they
haven't even given it a name
yet."
The discovery was made by a
British Colombian team funded
by the European
Research Council.
The researchers' team
leader, a professor
of archeology at
Exeter University,
and a leading
expert on the Amazon
and pre-Columbian history,
said, "When you're there,
your emotions flow.
We're talking about several
tens of thousands of paintings.
It's going to take
generations to record them.
Every turn you do, it's
a new wall of paintings.
We started seeing animals
that are now extinct.
The pictures are
so natural and so
well made that we have few
doubts that you're looking
at a horse, for example.
The ice age horse has
a wild, heavy face.
It's so detailed, we can
even see the horse hair.
It's fascinating."
The site of the
discovery is so remote
that after a two-hour drive, a
team of archeologists and film
makers had to trek on foot for
around four hours to find it.
Even after arriving
at the site, the team
found that some of
the paintings were
placed so high up
that they could only
be viewed with drones.
Al-Shamahi remarked on the
incredible depiction of ice age
life in the Amazon, as suggested
by the newly discovered
paintings, "One of the
most fascinating things
was seeing ice age megafauna
because that's a marker of time.
I don't think people
realize that the Amazon has
shifted in the way it looks.
It hasn't always
been a rainforest.
When you look at a horse or
mastodon in these paintings,
of course, they weren't
going to live in a forest.
They're too big.
Not only are they
giving clues about when
they were painted by some
of the earliest people--
that in itself is
just mind-boggling--
but they're also giving clues
about what this very spot might
have looked like,
more savanna-like."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For centuries, there have been
tales of beings, some human
and some not, living in
the vast cavities that
exist deep beneath the
surface of the earth.
But exactly who or what these
beings are and what they want
is open to question.
Sometimes these tales are based
on half-remembered rumors.
And there has seldom
been anything definite.
But there are also
ancient structures,
such as the necropolis,
called the Hal Saflieni
Hypogeum in Malta, that
helps corroborate such tales.
This strange subterranean
construction,
which dates from
around 4000 BCE,
is one of Europe's only known
neolithic underground dwellings.
Elsewhere, there
are several others,
including Derinkuyu in
Turkey, the Underground
City of Naours in
Northern France,
and, of course, the fascinating
and hauntingly beautiful city
of Petra in Southern Jordan.
Strange indeed, but at
least we know they exist.
However, there are others
that are more questionable,
particularly those that hint
at the existence of long lost
technologies.
One of these is the
legendary city of Shin-au-av
that is said to lie
deep below Death
Valley, a vast and
barren area that
straddles the California-Nevada
border in the USA.
This strange hidden city, whose
name means God's Land or Ghost
Land, is thought
to have contained
many anomalous and
out-of-place artifacts that
should not belong to the era in
which it was supposedly built.
There are two versions of how
this underground city came
to being, although they
may be closely interlinked.
One version implies
that it is linked
to a race that existed
at the dawn of time
and had a presence worldwide.
They were called
the serpent people.
In India, they were known
as the nagas or snakes
and the Quetzalcoatl or plumed
serpent in ancient Mexico.
The ancient egyptians
called them the Djedi,
and the Chinese knew
them as lung or dragons.
In ancient Britain,
they were called adders
or the serpents of wisdom.
Appropriately enough,
the name adder
is also given to a
species of poisonous snake
that is indigenous
to areas of the UK.
It doesn't seem to matter
which race encountered them
because they were invariably
worshipped and regarded
as helpers and prophets.
All of the legends have
said this mysterious race
could either take human
or reptilian form.
And as is the way with
reptiles and snakes,
lived below the surface and
created underground cities
worldwide.
Under the guidance of
the serpent people,
dragon cultures
developed, which normally
involve the construction
of huge pyramids
and other structures
covered with serpent motifs.
These cultures were and ruled
by benevolent dragon kings.
And even today, signs
of vanished races
are still evident.
In fact, these legends
associated with the Paiute tribe
resonate strongly with other
native American tribes, notably
the Hopi and Zuni peoples,
whose creation legends also
tell of their
ancestors' emergence
from the dark
subterranean world.
It is unlikely that
at the dawn of time
these people would
have direct contact.
So it's strange how
closely their legends
have become intermingled.
For many centuries, the
legends of the Paiute tribe
of North America have told of
this lost city, also referred
to as the Ghost Land.
According to legend,
Shin-au-av was
formed when a young
god, Shin-au-av, was
asked to take a sealed
bag across the desert
and only open it when he
got to the other side.
But because he was young and he
felt movement inside the bag,
the god became
curious and opened it,
allowing the contents, in this
case, hordes of human beings
to escape.
These people, who
eventually became
known by the name of the god,
Shin-au-av, saw some mountains
in the distance and
ran towards them.
One of the older gods
saw this and demanded
to know why he had done this.
And a furious row developed.
According to the legend, the
people heard the heated exchange
but could see nothing,
so they became afraid
and dug a tunnel
and hid in it, which
is how the underground
city was created.
These events became part
of Paiute creation legends
and were adopted into their
belief of an afterlife.
Another part of this legend
tells of how many centuries
later the wife of a Paiute
chief died in childbirth.
And in his grief, he wanted
to be reunited with her,
so traveled to the
land of the dead.
This involved passing through a
miles-long underground passage.
And on his journey,
he was attacked
by the fearsome creatures
that lived there.
Finally, he got to
the end of the passage
and found himself standing
at the end of a narrow bridge
carved from the solid rock.
The bridge crossed what he
looked like a bottomless chasm.
He crossed the bridge
and finally arrived
in the land of the dead, which
was ruled over by Shin-au-av.
One of the inhabitants met him,
a strangely beautiful female
with snake-like features, who
took him into a huge open area.
Here he saw thousands of dead
members of his tribe dancing.
He asked if his
wife was with them.
His guide told him she was,
and that once he had found her,
they must both immediately
leave the valley
and, common with Lot's
wife in the bible,
should not on any account
look back for any reason.
The chief promised to do this.
And he watched the
dancers for several hours
until he saw his wife.
He called out to her.
And she turned and saw him.
She left the dancers
and ran towards him.
And they promptly fled
to the rock ridge,
leaving from Shin-au-av to the
cavern and the world above.
However, he forgot
his promise and turned
to take one look back
at where he had been.
And as he did so,
his wife and the city
immediately disappeared.
Once he had recovered
from the shock,
he made his way out of the
cavern and rejoined his tribe.
He spent the rest of his life
describing the peace, happiness,
and beauty that he had found
in the underground land.
Legends like this were
forgotten until in 1947.
They resurfaced when an article
appeared in The San Diego
Union-Tribune.
The article mentioned that
several years previously,
the remains of an
ancient civilization
had been found in the desert.
These remains included
an underground city
containing gigantic
skeletons and mummies
wearing leather clothing.
And the walls of the city were
covered with strange carvings
and images.
This article also stated
that in 1931, an archeologist
had located tunnels leading
to the city underneath Death
Valley.
And he intended to excavate
and explore his find.
He said that work
had already started,
removing the skeletons from
the caverns, most of which
were between 8 and 9 feet long.
The article also suggested
that out-of-place artifacts
had been found,
indicating that there
was a level of
technology present
that was unlike the
rest of the find.
Like the mummies, the skeletons
were still clad in garments.
But these were made of hair.
And the garments were
of medium length,
comprising a jacket and
knee-length trousers.
Initial testing suggested that
the remains were in the region
of 80,000 years old.
It was also stated that
another cavern had been found.
This cavern, which
they called the temple,
had apparently been used
for ceremonies or rituals.
And it contained objects
and strange markings
familiar to those used
by the Freemasons.
A long tunnel from this
area led to another room
containing the remains of
dinosaurs, saber-toothed tigers,
elephants, and other
animals, which were displayed
in alcoves in the walls.
The men got the impression that
some catastrophe had occurred
above ground and
people had taken refuge
in this elaborate cave system.
The dwellings were well
equipped, and among the articles
found were objects that
they could not recognize.
And it was not until
after 1947 that they were
found to be microwave ovens.
Furthermore, it
appeared that the city
had been lit using a
form of gas lighting
which had been fueled by
sources of natural gas.
Elsewhere, there
were huge stone doors
that seemed to
have been operated
using a complex system
of counterweights.
This took the form
of hundreds of globes
dotted around the cave system.
The globes contain
pieces of stone
that was found to be
mildly radioactive
and is thought that
at one time may
have provided a light source.
In addition to this, other
totally out-of-place devices
resembling radio
sets were also found.
However, a few days after
the first article appeared
in The San Diego Union-Tribune,
another article entitled
"Expedition Reports
9-Foot Skeletons"
appeared in another
Nevada newspaper,
the now defunct Hot Citizen.
Some viewed this as no more than
something created by a reporter,
while others believe
the evidence is there
and is being kept from
the general public.
One account from the early
1900s alleges that two men were
traveling through Death Valley
and one of them allegedly fell
into an old mine shaft at a
place called Wingate Pass.
Fortunately, he was not badly
injured and could see odd shapes
nearby.
He called out to his companion,
who climbed down to join him.
They found themselves
in a cavern
which they claim
to have followed
about 20 miles into the heart
of the Panamint Mountains.
They claimed to have
found themselves
in another cavern containing a
huge ancient underground city.
They continued
exploring and discovered
that they had climbed some
distance into the mountains.
And although still
underground, they
could see openings some
distance above the ground
that led outside.
They looked and realized that
the valley below had once
been under water and that
the openings appeared
to have once been designed to
allow vessels to moor alongside.
They realized that the
valley was once underwater.
And eventually came
to the conclusion
that the arched openings
had been ancient docks
for seagoing vessels.
The area around Wingate
Pass, where the discoveries
were made later, became part
of the US Navy weapons testing
facility at China Lake and is
now off limits to the public
and is currently impossible to
check if any of these claims
are accurate.
However, governments will always
conceal inconvenient evidence
from the public.
They've done this for decades.
And this practice shows no
signs of stopping any time soon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Dashka Stone is a
controversial artifact
that is believed by some
to be the guidelines used
by the architect of the world
known as the Map of the Creator.
The stone tablet has
baffled researchers
since its discovery in 1999.
As impossible as it may
seem, Russian experts
believe the stone map could
be 120 million years old.
The Dashka slab depicts not
only the environs of the Ural
Mountains but also a series
of civil engineering projects,
including 7,457 miles of
channels, several dams,
and hieroglyphic notations
of unknown origin.
The accuracy and
perspective of the map
suggests that it was
created from an aerial point
of observation.
The hieroglyphs have not,
as of this time of writing,
been deciphered but are
thought to be related
to an ancient form of Chinese.
Archeologists from the Bashkir
State University discovered
the Dashka Stone in the Ural
Mountains of Eastern Russia
on July the 21st, 1999.
The discoverers were
immediately struck
by the size of the tablet.
It measures 58 inches high, 42
inches wide, and 6 inches thick
and weighs 1 ton.
Upon further examination,
the researchers
were even more stunned.
The tablet appears to
show a highly accurate
topographical map of Bashkiria,
a specific area of the Ural
Mountains at a scale
of approximately 1
to 1.1 kilometers.
Alexandr Chuvyrov, a professor
at Bashkir State University, who
led the team, named
the stone Dashka
in honor of his grandfather,
who was born on that day.
He said, "At first sight, I
understood that this was not
a simple stone piece, but a
real map, and not a single map,
but a three-dimensional.
You can see it yourself."
The Map of the Creator is
comprised of three levels,
strongly suggesting that it
didn't originate in nature
but was artificially made.
The first layer is
roughly 7 inches
of a cement or ceramic
compound based on dolomite.
The second layer
is roughly 1 inch
of diopside glass
enriched with silicon.
The third layer is only
a few millimeters thick
and is made of
calcium-porcelain mixture,
perhaps to give the
tablet added protection,
or perhaps to create a diffused
light to better illuminate
the stone.
"How did we manage to
identify the place?"
Said Chuvyrov.
"At first, we couldn't imagine
the map was so ancient.
Happily, relief of
today's Bashkiria
has not changed so much
within millions of years.
We could identify Ufa
Height, while Ufa Canyon is
the main point of our proofs
because we carried out
geological studies and found its
track where it must be according
to the ancient map.
Displacement of
the canyon happened
because of tectonic slabs
which moved from east.
The group of Russian
and Chinese specialists
in the field of cartography,
physics, mathematics, geology,
chemistry, and Old
Chinese language
managed to precisely find
out that the slab contains
the map of the Ural
region, with the rivers.
Belaya, Ufimka, Sutolka.
You can also see Ufa
Canyon, the break
of the earth's crust stretched
out from the city of Ufa
to the city of Sterlitamak.
At the moment, Ursak River
runs over the former canyon."
The Dashka Stone
undoubtedly points
to a Ural civilization more
advanced than previously
suspected.
However, the claims that it
was made 120 million years ago
by a geographic creator
are most likely false.
The Bashkir researchers
derived this date
from a pair of ancient seashells
found locked in the stone slab.
The first shell could be as
old as 500 million years old.
The second shell could be
as old as 120 million years.
Why these shells, still
intact, were incorporated
into the tablet or if they
were purposely included at all,
they cannot be
known for certain.
Scientists suspect that,
aside from the ancient shells,
the tablet was made
approximately 3,000 years ago.
However, it's
exceedingly difficult
to radiocarbon date the
engravings themselves.
Great attention has
been paid to the variety
of magnificent megalithic
structures around the world,
yet very little is reported on
the mysterious and impressive
set of stone structures that
can be found in the Ural
Mountains of Russia.
In the Sverdlovsk Oblast
region in the middle Urals,
there can be found
numerous dolmens.
According to controversial
descriptions,
a dolmen is a type of
single-chambered megalithic
tomb.
However, there is
really no evidence
to suggest that they were
initially constructed as tombs.
Rather, it seemed that
subsequent civilizations chose
to use them for this purpose.
Dolmens are usually comprised
of two or more vertical stones
supporting a flat
horizontal stone on top.
There can be variations ranging
from relatively simple to very
complex.
The dolmens in the
Urals are considered
to be small compared
to other dolmens,
ranging from approximately
1.5 to 2.5 meters in width
and length.
There is some variance in the
dolmens of the Urals with two
distinct styles.
The stone plate
dolmens are created
with a mound of stones that
have an attached chamber.
These usually have a
square court in front
and are sometimes surrounded
by smaller stones.
The boulder dolmens are
constructed from large boulders
that form a chamber.
The chamber is covered by
one or more flat stones.
There is some
variation in structure
of the boulder dolmens.
But they all have
two entrance points--
a main entrance to the
side and a small entrance
between boulders.
The menhirs are the
most typical type
of megalith found in the Urals.
A menhir is a single
vertical stone.
They can be found singularly
as a monolith or in groups.
The menhirs found in the Urals
include monoliths and groupings
and tend to be roughly finished.
All of the monoliths
discovered to this point
are located near either a
settlement or a cemetery
from the Bronze
Age, 3300 to 600 BC.
Some of the many groups are
in rows, 13 to 18 meters long.
A circular shaped structure
was discovered at the village
of Akhunovo in Bashkiria.
Eight menhirs are formed
into a circular shape
that is approximately
25 meters in diameter.
While the dolmens and
menhirs are amazing
and mysterious structures
themselves, the most amazing
find in the Urals are the
megaliths of Vera Island in Lake
Turgoyak.
Dating to the Eneolithic period.
These megaliths are referred
to as Megalith Number 1,
Megalith Number 2, Megalith
Number 3, Vera Island 9,
and Vera Island 4.
Megalith Number 1 is the
largest megalith structure
on the island, standing
at 16 by 9 meters.
Its cut into the bedrock
and covered with capstones.
It's orientated towards the west
and includes a long entrance,
a central hall, and two chambers
with a connecting corridor.
It includes windows and
sculptures of bulls and wolves.
It's speculated that megalith
number one served as a temple
at some point.
Megalith Number 2, pictured
in the feature image,
was found carved into a rocky
slope with a mound structure
covering it.
It's orientated north and
contained two chambers connected
by a corridor.
Megalith Number 3 is
created by large boulders
with a square pit cut
into the center rock.
It's closed off by
vertical stone slabs
with massive boulders
as capstones.
Vera Island 9 is a cultic
ritual place with two menhirs,
while Vera Island 4 is a
cultic place surrounded
by vertical stones with a
small menhir in the center.
The megaliths of the Urals are
undoubtedly an impressive sight.
Yet strangely,
virtually nothing is
known about who created
them, how they were built,
or what purpose they
were intended to serve.
The megaliths stretch across
an immense area of land,
suggesting that they were not
all created by a single group.
Megalith Number 1
on Vera Island is
believed to have been
a temple at some point.
However, other megaliths
present no obvious signs
that they were used for
any religious purposes.
Nevertheless, it's
possible that the megaliths
had a common use in spite of
the variances in size and shape.
It's hoped that further
archeological research may
help to unravel the mysteries
of these spectacular structures,
as well as the civilization that
created them many millennia ago.